David Schaich (he): All right, we may as well get going today.  And let me just start with the
David Schaich (he): 6-digit attendance code this time: 1, 2, 1, 1, 4, 5.
David Schaich (he): It's a bit smaller crowd than usual, though I
David Schaich (he): suspect some folks may be busy working on the computer project that's due tomorrow.  Are there
David Schaich (he): any questions about that, or about the homework for next week before we get under way?
David Schaich (he): I can also
David Schaich (he): expand that to ask if there any questions about what we covered last week.
David Schaich (he): This introduced
David Schaich (he): the micro-canonical ensemble, our first
David Schaich (he): concrete realization of a statistical ensemble --- an example of a probability space that consists of a collection of degrees of freedom, or particles, that
David Schaich (he): evolve in time, randomly sampling the possible micro-states
David Schaich (he): of all those particles.  And characterized by
David Schaich (he): conserved qualities. In the case of the micro-canonical ensemble
David Schaich (he): there's a picture we can use to
David Schaich (he): recall what those conserved quantities are. If I zoom out to put it on the screen.  In the micro-canonical case, both the number of degrees of freedom (the particle number, N)
David Schaich (he): as well as the internal energy of the system. our conserved as time passes, and
David Schaich (he): the degrees of freedom adopt all of the possible microstates probabilistically.
David Schaich (he): and what this means in order to have energy conservation consistent with the first law thermodynamics is that any microeconomic ensemble has to be
David Schaich (he): the isolated from the surroundings that shown on here as some insulation around it closed, be her with
David Schaich (he): a collection of particles bouncing around inside it. So there's no way to
David Schaich (he): exchange of the particles or energy with the outside world, which is the
David Schaich (he): they consider these
David Schaich (he): impractical. We' not to talk about physical experiments and making observations of these systems.
David Schaich (he): but it does provide a nice
David Schaich (he): sensible connection to that first law thermodynamics, the conservation of energy. We just impose that from the outset.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): gives us a starting point to find important thermodynamical concepts like equilibrium.
David Schaich (he): We saw that thermodynamic equilibrium
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): smooth and steady, Large scale behavior of these systems, but it's still dynamic in the sense that the system continues
David Schaich (he): evolving from microstates microstates as time goes on. And it just
David Schaich (he): happens to be that all of those microstates that evolution produce the smooth behavior that we're used to
David Schaich (he): from it our everyday experience. This is intimately related to the concept of in a particular thermodynamic equilibrium. Can't be you.
David Schaich (he): It's fine bye. demanding that the is maximized. The entropy in general
David Schaich (he): it's the negative sum over
David Schaich (he): the probability of each micro State times. This logarithm
David Schaich (he): in the micro canonical case specifically, and for theatic equilibrium
David Schaich (he): I just maximize to the logarithm of the number of microstates and the identification of equilibrium with the state of maximum entropy is related to
David Schaich (he): so called second ball of thermodynamics.
David Schaich (he): that the entropy you use always now decreasing as time passes and generically increases.
David Schaich (he): and if there are no questions about that aspect of the those aspects of the microeconomical ensemble. What a plan for today is to actually wrap up material we have on the micro canonical ensemble which is defining
David Schaich (he): the temperature. Yes, a derived quantity. and you stop the conservative particle, number and energy. and also checking that the temperature behaved sensibly, as we would expect
David Schaich (he): again for everyday experience from
David Schaich (he): the process of heat exchange.
David Schaich (he): It will then move on to It's called the
David Schaich (he): See how it is easier to work with than the micro canonical case.
David Schaich (he): Also define.
Yes.
David Schaich (he): for the essential fundamental aspects, something known as
David Schaich (he): the partition function generating functional of various derived quantities, one of which
David Schaich (he): the heat capacity appears
David Schaich (he): on the homework assignment to a week from tomorrow, so I want to make sure to.
David Schaich (he): I touch on that today any questions before we get under way.
David Schaich (he): But with that what they do
David Schaich (he): the for sure. You know. the micro canonical ensemble is a derived quantity. like the entropy. so
David Schaich (he): also, like the
David Schaich (he): entropy, it should be
David Schaich (he): stable in from a dynamic equilibrium.
David Schaich (he): As time goes on in the system evolves from the microstates to microstates.
David Schaich (he): so that is to say, that
David Schaich (he): the temperature, like the entropy, is
David Schaich (he): the function of the conserved quantities that
David Schaich (he): are required to be stable as yeah system of all
David Schaich (he): this but the temperature t it's a function of the conserved energy and particle number.
David Schaich (he): and we'll just go ahead, and you find the inverse temperature
David Schaich (he): actually to be
David Schaich (he): of the
David Schaich (he): on that. The energy in the system. with the particle number fixed. and
David Schaich (he): as this is defined in thermodynamic equilibrium, that's the case, we will focus on in general.
David Schaich (he): unless otherwise specified. we can relate this to
David Schaich (he): the total number of microstates 40. Given that one of
David Schaich (he): the energy and a fixed number of particles. So
David Schaich (he): this is maybe not the most obvious or intuitive.
David Schaich (he): There are some examples in the lecture notes that are they recorded
David Schaich (he): separately as a supplement. I want to make sure that we get through the key capacity.
David Schaich (he): Today we'll just politically say, what does this equation mean
David Schaich (he): that we think about adding energy here
David Schaich (he): to
David Schaich (he): a system
David Schaich (he): so technically moving from one micro canonical system to the next by increasing this energy.
David Schaich (he): if that produces a
David Schaich (he): large increase in
David Schaich (he): the entropy. Yes.
David Schaich (he): then this partial derivative is a large number with the number of particles fixed.
David Schaich (he): so the inverse temperature must be
David Schaich (he): small.
David Schaich (he): One over a small number becomes that large number.
David Schaich (he): and the same is true. If there's a small increase that corresponds to a large temperature. So hot systems with a high temperature are the ones for which, adding a bit more energy, this fixed collection of particles does not have
David Schaich (he): much effect on the entropy, or the number of microstates and cold systems are those in which, adding a little bit of energy. It does have a large effect.
David Schaich (he): which.
David Schaich (he): if you think about it, is sensible enough qualitatively
David Schaich (he): the call system. You think of it as having less energy. So every little bit that is added has a bigger effect.
David Schaich (he): But maybe the
David Schaich (he): best way to check that. This kind of abstract definition in terms of microeconomical qualities is sensible is to
David Schaich (he): consider the process of heat exchange
David Schaich (he): between 2 systems. So we'll do this in 3 stages.
David Schaich (he): We start off with
David Schaich (he): to
David Schaich (he): isolated micro canonical systems
David Schaich (he): both of them are. and some of dynamic equilibrium. I'll call it one system a. Which is so number of particles in a
David Schaich (he): energy E. A. That together determine its temperature. Ta: that we will assume to be greater than 0 just for simplicity.
David Schaich (he): Yeah, same with the
David Schaich (he): other system, just with the is replaced by bees.
David Schaich (he): That's on the
David Schaich (he): dot can now. And the second step is that we
David Schaich (he): put these 2 systems into thermal contacts
David Schaich (he): and wait some amount of time for the combined system to
David Schaich (he): equilibrium to
David Schaich (he): a single intensive temperature that is shared by
David Schaich (he): both of the subsystems that are now allowed to exchange energy.
David Schaich (he): So This is
David Schaich (he): similar to what we did last week when deriving the second law thermodynamics. We.
David Schaich (he): If I was overall combined system, i'll make a senior
David Schaich (he): where each of its 2 subsystems still have their fixed number of particles. but the energies
David Schaich (he): and the 2 systems can be
David Schaich (he): swapped from one side
David Schaich (he): to the other, and only the total energy e a plus you. The
David Schaich (he): is conserved
David Schaich (he): within this overall micro canonical system, Omega, c.
David Schaich (he): So we wait some time for this overall system to
David Schaich (he): equilibrium for sure.
David Schaich (he): And then we we isolate
David Schaich (he): you 2 subsystems.
David Schaich (he): I decorate them now with
David Schaich (he): problems on all of these qualities. so
David Schaich (he): call it Omega, a prime, which is not necessarily the same.
David Schaich (he): is what we started off with Omega a. Because energy
David Schaich (he): may have been
David Schaich (he): exchange, and generically will have been exchanged between these 2 systems.
David Schaich (he): so there is some chance that E. A.
David Schaich (he): Will be the same as the initial.
David Schaich (he): but
David Schaich (he): more generally what that energy and the corresponding temperatures may be different.
David Schaich (he): And we can ask, what do we expect
David Schaich (he): physically without doing any calculations, what we expect physically wrong?
David Schaich (he): This three-step process
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): that will just
David Schaich (he): go ahead and write down my expectations hopefully. You will
David Schaich (he): agree with
David Schaich (he): that.
David Schaich (he): If one of the initial subsystems is hotter than the other. one is hover, one is colder, we would expect energy
David Schaich (he): to flow
David Schaich (he): probably harder system
David Schaich (he): to the colder one.
David Schaich (he): reducing the temperature of the hotter system, raising the temperature of the colder system and bringing them into
David Schaich (he): plus for alignment. So if you have, say a cup of coffee, and you or some
David Schaich (he): oh, milk into it. you expect us 2 systems to
David Schaich (he): come together to a temperature in between. The coffee gets cooler, you know it gets warmer. It's not the best example, because the particles there are mixing, but it's a familiar one
David Schaich (he): from every day
easily generalizable to
David Schaich (he): this case. So now let's actually do the mathematical calculation
David Schaich (he): to check that
David Schaich (he): our definition of the temperature, and produces that intuitively expected behavior.
David Schaich (he): So the way to do this we're calling
David Schaich (he): our definition of the inverse temperature.
David Schaich (he): we will need to figure out the entropy of the system, how they depend on the energies.
David Schaich (he): and see what that produces for
David Schaich (he): the temperature.
David Schaich (he): And from the second law
David Schaich (he): of thermodynamics we know that the entropy of these 2 systems, as time goes on. can never decrease and generically increases. So
David Schaich (he): the total entropy in that first stage of 2 isolated subsystems with
David Schaich (he): energies. Ea.
David Schaich (he): I'll ignore the particle numbers, because that's those are just fixed throughout the trivial.
David Schaich (he): In that first stage we know the entropy has to be no larger than the entropy of the mine system. We call the entropy the extensive quality that just adds across our systems
David Schaich (he): the entropy of the combined system right to help
David Schaich (he): like that. It depends on the total energy at between the 2 that is conserved. and this in turn can be no larger. and the final entropy
David Schaich (he): of the systems with
David Schaich (he): E. A. Prime
David Schaich (he): once they have been. we isolated in that final stage.
David Schaich (he): Now see what
David Schaich (he): make use of this. We need some way to connect
David Schaich (he): the you
David Schaich (he): entropy as functions of
David Schaich (he): it's called engineering subscripts. S. For system, System a and B. You
David Schaich (he): entropy start the energy E. A prime and eb. Prime
David Schaich (he): will just be the initial energy, the a or e
David Schaich (he): plus
David Schaich (he): some delta e. The amount of energy that is exchanged with the first law of thermodynamics.
David Schaich (he): guaranteeing that
David Schaich (he): the amount of energy, that the amount by which the energy changes in each system is equal and opposite
David Schaich (he): Delta E. B is negative, the energy on one side increases.
David Schaich (he): It has to come from the other side. I'm. Just there for decreases.
David Schaich (he): and assuming for simplicity that this change is relatively small compared to the total.
David Schaich (he): This is can be done without all in generality, because, if it's not the case, we can imagine going to computing this process several times.
David Schaich (he): we a small changes that I at all you can but functions of the energy through
David Schaich (he): you, Taylor expansion something like. should you have seen before. Possibly not for
David Schaich (he): a while. The entropy in system
David Schaich (he): is the best after we isolation is
David Schaich (he): the entropy of that original energy plus delta e.
David Schaich (he): which is the original entropy. plus its partial derivative
David Schaich (he): with respect to the energy evaluated
David Schaich (he): for the initial. multiply it bye the change in energy. and then up to these small corrections.
David Schaich (he): beginning with delta e squared that we can. What
David Schaich (he): this does assume that the entropy is continuous, differentiable function of the conservative quantities. which
David Schaich (he): is the case, except that what I call first order phase transitions which we'll get to after
David Schaich (he): the Easter break.
David Schaich (he): So for now that assumption holds, and
David Schaich (he): from the definition of it's not for sure as the derivative of
David Schaich (he): the inverse temperatures from the
David Schaich (he): you now have. hey? Nice
David Schaich (he): connection between the entropy after we actually the systems at the end of that 3 step process and the initial energy
David Schaich (he): along with the initial temperature
David Schaich (he): T. A. And TV so plugging that in to our inequalities. From the second off
David Schaich (he): we have with the sum s of the a and Smb. Has to be less than or equal to 2 of our expansions
David Schaich (he): approximate symbol, just because i'm dropping the high order terms on that line.
David Schaich (he): We have S. Of E. A. Prime. That's a. V a plus delta the a. Over T. A.
David Schaich (he): And then. similarly for
David Schaich (he): system, Omega v. Prime, it has to be
David Schaich (he): so. There's lots of cancellations and no just with the statement that. And still to ebay
David Schaich (he): over t a plus delta eb, which
David Schaich (he): is the negative of Delta E
David Schaich (he): over TV has to be greater than
David Schaich (he): or equal to 0, or just pulling out that overall factor. the differences
David Schaich (he): of the inverse temperatures multiplied by
David Schaich (he): the change. The energy of the initial system
David Schaich (he): has to be a non-negative number, and will be a positive number, except in
David Schaich (he): the very special and unusual circumstances.
David Schaich (he): So there are
David Schaich (he): 3 cases that we could consider.
David Schaich (he): First possibility is that
David Schaich (he): the initial temperature in system a is larger than that and System B.
David Schaich (he): So it's in verses smaller. You are subtracting a
David Schaich (he): larger inverse from a smaller inverse. We come out with the overall negative number in the parentheses.
David Schaich (he): so the other number also generically needs to be negative
David Schaich (he): people here for the product to be non-negative.
David Schaich (he): that is, delta e they less than 0. So the energy in this 3 step procedure
David Schaich (he): is flowing from
David Schaich (he): the hotter system
David Schaich (he): Omega 8 with the water temperature. Ta
David Schaich (he): to
David Schaich (he): colder system will make it be just as we expect, lowering the higher temperature and reason the lower temperature.
David Schaich (he): Similarly, if we
David Schaich (he): this reverse this inequality. And suppose this
David Schaich (he): system B and the larger temperature to start off with, then we have a larger, inverse, minus a smaller inverse, so a positive
David Schaich (he): value in the parentheses
David Schaich (he): that requires the positive
David Schaich (he): change in the energy of system. Ea, in order to get a positive product.
David Schaich (he): So that is the
David Schaich (he): same behavior. The energy is flowing from the hotter system in this case only to be
David Schaich (he): to
David Schaich (he): system, which is Omega a.
David Schaich (he): And the final case is the very special case where the initial temperatures were equal. There is that
David Schaich (he): no energy flow? And this is the special situation in which the
David Schaich (he): inequality saturated. We actually have no change in the
David Schaich (he): and the flow of the energy. No change in the temperature either.
David Schaich (he): So they are all people. They state people. all the issues behaving as you would expect, and connecting that
David Schaich (he): definition mathematically in terms of the
David Schaich (he): energy dependence of the entropy to usual familiar, everyday behavior. So any questions about temperature or heat exchange in the micro canonical ensemble.
David Schaich (he): You may already be anticipating the next step which ones
David Schaich (he): the the question that
David Schaich (he): I put up on getting set up for you to think about
David Schaich (he): that with the complete isolation of microeconomic.
David Schaich (he): this allow any change in their energy or any exchange of energy with their surroundings.
David Schaich (he): It turns out to be
David Schaich (he): essentially impossible to observe these systems from the outside. There's no way to make an observation without exchanging some energy or particle in the system.
David Schaich (he): and since we don't want to include ourselves in a system of, say, gas particles
David Schaich (he): with a fixed amount of energy microeconomical system, despite it's nice connection to The first and second law of thermodynamics
David Schaich (he): is in practice not terribly useful, because that energy conservation is never
David Schaich (he): realize in the physical experiments that we want to describe mathematically.
David Schaich (he): so they much more useful approach
David Schaich (he): is known as the economical ensemble
David Schaich (he): sacrifice. The direct connection to the first law of thermodynamics.
David Schaich (he): With
David Schaich (he): Yeah, more
David Schaich (he): practical economical way of setting things up
David Schaich (he): that complete isolation
David Schaich (he): from the environment demanded by the microconic on some one. It's not realistic.
David Schaich (he): So instead, we will work with
David Schaich (he): not a call ensemble.
David Schaich (he): It's characterized
David Schaich (he): the longer by
David Schaich (he): a conserved energy. but instead I fixed temperature
t
David Schaich (he): and the same
David Schaich (he): sure particle number.
David Schaich (he): and it's the microeconomic a well sample, and which is a much less stringent condition. You've already been thinking about
David Schaich (he): heat exchange between 2
David Schaich (he): subsystems of the micro canonical ensemble
David Schaich (he): where it's fairly easy to say, make an air kind of container that can serve as aable number, but it doesn't require that the energy be
David Schaich (he): completely insulated.
David Schaich (he): So we keep the conserved particle number, condition, and we add to it the condition of
David Schaich (he): it. Fixed temperature.
David Schaich (he): which raises the question of how do we imagine that temperature can be fixed.
David Schaich (he): So the component part I. The definition of the
David Schaich (he): is that this fixed temperature is realized.
David Schaich (he): Thermal contact
David Schaich (he): with its surroundings. the so called thermal reservoir.
David Schaich (he): which is sometimes
David Schaich (he): there's a key path. so a picture that we can have in here. It was
David Schaich (he): doing an experiment with a collection of gas particles and some container in our lab.
David Schaich (he): The gas particles in that container is the
David Schaich (he): system of interest described by the economical ensemble and the rest of our lab. The
David Schaich (he): they are in the environment. That it is in thermal contact with. It is fixing its temperature and allowing us to treat it as economical, ensemble
David Schaich (he): with a fixed temperature rather than fix energy.
David Schaich (he): Now, this still actually
David Schaich (he): as a remnant of the micro canonical ensemble in it. Because if we consider that
David Schaich (he): system and
David Schaich (he): it's environment
David Schaich (he): in combination. So I call the system Omega. Call that reservoir. They'll make it red overall system. The total oh, make up
David Schaich (he): This remains
David Schaich (he): Micro Cannot Nicole.
David Schaich (he): and in particular, that means that
David Schaich (he): the total energy of the system, plus and thermal reservoir
David Schaich (he): which we've seen, energy is. and extensive quantity, adding across those subsystems that remains conserved. We have a closed system of which we're just looking at
David Schaich (he): a small heart
David Schaich (he): in particular, the energy e of
David Schaich (he): economical system, Omega. It's allowed to
David Schaich (he): by exchanging energy with this reservoir.
David Schaich (he): The idea is that the
David Schaich (he): fluctuations of the canonical system and this reservoir
David Schaich (he): are such that any fluctuations in them do not change the
David Schaich (he): temperature, which is an intensive quality, the same across all of the subsystems, independent of the subsystem size.
David Schaich (he): you know a key step to having the economical ensemble makes sense. To be something that we can work with mathematically
David Schaich (he): is that we don't want to always have to rely on stepping up to the combined system plus reservoir
David Schaich (he): total, that for me. It's micro-canonic couple days that first of all thermodynamics.
David Schaich (he): We need to show that's the details
David Schaich (he): how the rest of you are
David Schaich (he): don't actually matter
David Schaich (he): 2, the canonical system, Omega.
David Schaich (he): And if we can do that, that will allow us to just consider
David Schaich (he): as economical, unsolvable
David Schaich (he): rather than part of a much bigger.
David Schaich (he): all clear so far
David Schaich (he): it's a bit more definitions.
David Schaich (he): a definite goal for us to pursue.
Yeah, the main road, the
David Schaich (he): first half of today's lecture. The way that we can do this. which is a trick introduced by Miller, gives in the early 19 hundreds
David Schaich (he): on the founders on the
David Schaich (he): Statistical Physics and its connections to thermodynamics
David Schaich (he): is known as
David Schaich (he): the replica trick.
David Schaich (he): which is.
David Schaich (he): or, I guess. for the form of
David Schaich (he): that large several reservoir which we will then use to show that
David Schaich (he): the form we are guessing. It's not actually that. So we we'll let
David Schaich (he): this reservoir the a large number
David Schaich (he): of copies of the system of interest.
David Schaich (he): I'll say this composed of
David Schaich (he): R. Minus one replicas for copies.
David Schaich (he): So if we had, you know Mega as the final one, the total system.
David Schaich (he): Omega total is accounting for our total copies that we assume is a large number.
David Schaich (he): All of these replicas all right
David Schaich (he): in full contact with each other.
David Schaich (he): and and through it equilibrium with each other. So the overall system is in front of every equilibrium, as
David Schaich (he): is all of its, or as all its subsystems.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): what this on thoughts does is guarantee that the reservoir is a physically sensible system, without having to
David Schaich (he): specify what particular system that is.
David Schaich (he): If we are interested in any given system, Omega, whether that's a system of spins pointing up or down, or a collection of particles in some container.
David Schaich (he): Then a large number of copies of that is going to be just as
David Schaich (he): physical and just as reasonable to talk about. So the sense that says, we're not doing anything special.
David Schaich (he): With this setup
David Schaich (he): we are
David Schaich (he): ensuring a reasonable system about specifying it. and we can right down that that total energy of the system.
David Schaich (he): plus the reservoir
David Schaich (he): is by extensivity
David Schaich (he): just the sum over our all our of these replicas. So I think this one, through our have
David Schaich (he): some value of the energy E of our.
David Schaich (he): You can pick out one of those to be our system of interest with energy, and all the rest come up with the form.
David Schaich (he): The reservoir that we hope will
David Schaich (he): fix the temperature
David Schaich (he): of the system without need to know any further details.
David Schaich (he): You can now turn this on his head, and just a bit.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): you find an energy e sub. I rather than e sub r
David Schaich (he): energy of
David Schaich (he): and corresponding microstates
David Schaich (he): we call Omega I. And in particular this is a microstate of
David Schaich (he): our system of interest, of which we have
David Schaich (he): our replicas in total.
David Schaich (he): And because these the system is in contact with this reservoir.
David Schaich (he): the energy is no longer conserved. Different microstates can have different energy, and can be adopted by exchanging energy between the system
David Schaich (he): and the surrounding reservoir.
David Schaich (he): And based on this, we will define
David Schaich (he): the occupation, number
David Schaich (he): and supply
David Schaich (he): to be the number of replicas out of the our tool
David Schaich (he): that adopt
David Schaich (he): this particular microstate omega to I. So All of these replicas are copies
David Schaich (he): of our system that make up. They are all
David Schaich (he): in microstates of that system at any point in time. Say we have a finite number in microstates as usual.
David Schaich (he): and we've a list.
David Schaich (he): We count how many of these replicas are
David Schaich (he): in each of the microstates at any point in time. So that means that you saw
David Schaich (he): from one to M
David Schaich (he): of the occupation number, for each microstate
David Schaich (he): has to account for all of the replicas in all of the microstates and total number of
David Schaich (he): the rest of you are.
David Schaich (he): The total energy can now be rewritten, not. or both, as some over all our replicas. but also as the sum over all M. Microstates
David Schaich (he): of the You. Energy, e sub. I. Of that microstate. Multiply it by
David Schaich (he): the number of times that microstate appears
David Schaich (he): among the
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): I'm. Just deciding whether or not to give an example. I think I we have time
David Schaich (he): for that before the break before I do
David Schaich (he): also consider dividing this relation
David Schaich (he): by our on both sides.
David Schaich (he): and give us us shifting things back into view. Sum over, I.
David Schaich (he): Of the occupation number is a fraction of the total number of replicas
David Schaich (he): is something that we can call P. Sub. I. That adds up to one like a probability.
David Schaich (he): So this piece of I.
David Schaich (he): It finds
David Schaich (he): occupation, probability, and based on the occupation number. which we should interpret as the probability that if we
David Schaich (he): choose a replica at random, it is in
David Schaich (he): microstates, or make it some, I
David Schaich (he): and we will end up by reinterpreting this occupation. Probability, once we
David Schaich (he): show that the
David Schaich (he): form of the reservoir and its replicas are
David Schaich (he): irrelevance to the overall to the canonical system.
David Schaich (he): So we have occupation, numbers, and occupation probabilities.
David Schaich (he): Just to quickly make this
David Schaich (he): concept a little more concrete. You can consider it very. very small example of Hey: yeah.
David Schaich (he): Canonical system. So a system just of 2 spins that has 2 to 2 or 4 micro States
David Schaich (he): sorry.
David Schaich (he): highlighted in red the system
David Schaich (he): Omega that we're interested in. We then have
David Schaich (he): R. Minus one copies or replicas on that system that we put in surrounding it; and the idea is that
David Schaich (he): all of these replicas are exchanging
David Schaich (he): energy with each other in with the original system, internal contact in several equilibrium.
David Schaich (he): We're assuming that the 2 spins in the system are distinguishable.
David Schaich (he): let's call it you a important topic next week. But that how does that be? Microstates with
David Schaich (he): a downward, pointing spin on the left, and the upper pointing spin on the right are distinct from those would be down reporting spin on the right, and the other parting on the left.
David Schaich (he): so we can easily catalog
David Schaich (he): the 4 micro States.
David Schaich (he): both spins, pointing up. That's been pointing out right from pointing down vice versa. and those things pointing down call it
David Schaich (he): the corresponding occupation number.
David Schaich (he): counting the system as well as the reservoir. You see to
David Schaich (he): replicas that are in this first
David Schaich (he): micro.
David Schaich (he): See another 2 that have
David Schaich (he): up on the left and right down on the right. I see
David Schaich (he): finally 2
David Schaich (he): that have the opposite pattern down the left, up on the right.
David Schaich (he): and then 3 that are both down. and we can check that the some over
David Schaich (he): the occupation number something over all of the different microstates. 2 plus 2, 3 is 9,
David Schaich (he): which is indeed the number of replicas that we are looking for.
David Schaich (he): and perhaps the
David Schaich (he): Yes.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. So this is very simple example that I don't think is going to inspire any
David Schaich (he): questions. But it. It was straightforward. and we justify the next claim that for you overall system what I should call the system
David Schaich (he): reservoir. that will make a total is fully specified
David Schaich (he): bye
David Schaich (he): those that of them
David Schaich (he): occupation numbers.
David Schaich (he): So yeah.
David Schaich (he): number of replicas in each
David Schaich (he): of the M. Microstates. or equivalently the animal occupation probabilities. The probability that you randomly chose and replicate on microstates.
David Schaich (he): So we can ask, based on the definition that we introduced at the start of the day.
David Schaich (he): What is the temperature
David Schaich (he): of this overall micro canonical system
David Schaich (he): that's defined by
David Schaich (he): for you derivative of the entropy of that total system, with all our replicas divided by it's total energy with a fixed number of
David Schaich (he): and particles.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): because we assumed thermodynamic equilibrium
David Schaich (he): energy derivative of the the total number of microstates across all our of those replicas. and before the break I think we have
David Schaich (he): plenty of time to
David Schaich (he): figure out what the total number of microstates is
David Schaich (he): which you can do what? Just by counting the
David Schaich (he): number of ways.
David Schaich (he): Yeah to you all replicas can be arranged.
David Schaich (he): The set of occupation. Numbers yes.
David Schaich (he): specify the system.
David Schaich (he): so we have it all replicas. We want to sort them
David Schaich (he): into a set of. and
David Schaich (he): my occupation numbers.
David Schaich (he): So there are. and of these occupation
David Schaich (he): numbers that we want to pick out from among the
David Schaich (he): so we can start with any given one of those occupation numbers
David Schaich (he): so mathematically.
David Schaich (he): We want first to choose. say, and one
David Schaich (he): of these replicas that are in
David Schaich (he): microstates, omega, one of the
David Schaich (he): the small system that is replicated.
David Schaich (he): and the way of choosing. and one of the our replicas to be in that microstate is
David Schaich (he): exactly the
David Schaich (he): So that is just part of the
David Schaich (he): calculation. Yeah.
David Schaich (he): the next step is just to repeat this process for the remaining micro-states and remaining occupation numbers. If we move on to
David Schaich (he): microstates omega 2, we have n 2 of those out of the remaining replicas so.
David Schaich (he): and one of the replicas had already been assigned to Micro State one.
David Schaich (he): Our minus and one remain, and you want to choose.
David Schaich (he): and 2 of those to be in micro state, and 2
David Schaich (he): that you suspect
David Schaich (he): R. Minus n, one minus n 2 microstates I wish to choose, and 3,
David Schaich (he): and so on up until the end.
David Schaich (he): and so em
David Schaich (he): occupation number, which will be
David Schaich (he): necessarily
David Schaich (he): only determined by being identified with all of the remaining
David Schaich (he): microstates that
David Schaich (he): have not yet been assigned to any of the other.
David Schaich (he): So any of all the remaining replicas that have been assigned to any of the other micro states
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): hopefully that makes sense as I talked it through
David Schaich (he): from this point, so mathematical manipulation from the definition of
David Schaich (he): coefficients
David Schaich (he): that first our shoes and one factor is the
David Schaich (he): ratio of our factorial by and one factorial on this R minus one factorial
David Schaich (he): next has. and one factorial choosing and 2
David Schaich (he): factorial, the
David Schaich (he): the other factor in the denominator.
David Schaich (he): moving on our minus one minus and 2 from the numerator with, and 3 factorial
David Schaich (he): in the to 3 actually all the way up to. And so yeah.
David Schaich (he): So what we have is a telescoping correct
David Schaich (he): another day, telescoping some in each
David Schaich (he): pair of terms. The numerator of the second cances out one of the factors in the denominator of the first.
David Schaich (he): and leaves us just with the first factor of our
David Schaich (he): and then all of the remaining
David Schaich (he): and one
David Schaich (he): factorial and 2 factorial and 3 factorial all the way up to.
David Schaich (he): And so then factorial in the denominator.
David Schaich (he): So that is the total number of microstates for
David Schaich (he): the micro canonical combination of our system of interest, plus this reservoir.
David Schaich (he): thanks to this replica trick.
David Schaich (he): and that will be our starting point for figuring out
David Schaich (he): the remainder of the calculation of the temperature. After
David Schaich (he): Hey, we've break from the question so far about the
David Schaich (he): set up for this replica trick, for the number of microstates
David Schaich (he): computed for that overall combined system.
David Schaich (he): Not seeing a deal pause, the recording it's something to drink and be back
David Schaich (he): at 10
David Schaich (he): second half of of this morning's lecture.
David Schaich (he): Okay, I think it's time to proceed. Okay. we break for reflection. Now. you any answer questions about what we've seen so far today.
David Schaich (he): not seeing any of the
David Schaich (he): next step that we have on our way to figuring out the temperature
David Schaich (he): is to
David Schaich (he): If the logarithm of this total number of microseconds we calculated. and then try to figure out how it depends.
David Schaich (he): Total energy of our canonical system.
David Schaich (he): reservoir of replicas
David Schaich (he): and.
David Schaich (he): thanks to the properties of
David Schaich (he): logarithms.
David Schaich (he): we can break up the logarithm of this
David Schaich (he): ratio of factorial products into
David Schaich (he): the difference between the log of the numerator. minus the
David Schaich (he): log of the denominator. It's a log of a product which becomes a sum.
David Schaich (he): The floors we you from one to M. Of
David Schaich (he): the occupation number and supply factorial within the logarithm.
David Schaich (he): Now, if we
David Schaich (he): assume we are dealing with a
David Schaich (he): large number of particles and a large number of replicas. the usual say before physical physics.
David Schaich (he): and it's different than the what we look at is just 2 spins.
David Schaich (he): You can assume that all of the occupation numbers are large. So there's a
David Schaich (he): you, an arbitrarily large number. That's a finite number of replicas.
David Schaich (he): and this assumption allows us
David Schaich (he): to
David Schaich (he): apply service approximation
David Schaich (he): the logarithm of it factorial, which is.
David Schaich (he): is that a familiar term. Maybe if I write it down. Yes. total is approximately
David Schaich (he): minus car minus the So over I okay, similar. and I
David Schaich (he): minus. And I so that this really is for me what the long of a large factorial is
David Schaich (he): in this case. Our factory is
David Schaich (he): our our minus r plus corrections.
David Schaich (he): No one is subject to that. So it's something you may have seen before.
David Schaich (he): and if not, there is a tutorial activity that
David Schaich (he): actually go through the derivation of this, as well as the
David Schaich (he): small correction terms to it.
David Schaich (he): Of the
David Schaich (he): what this allows us to do at this level of approximation is the call that
David Schaich (he): the sum over all the
David Schaich (he): microstates of the occupation number has to be equal to the total number of replicas
David Schaich (he): relative negative sign between those 2. So those terms cancel out. and you can also express the occupation number itself
David Schaich (he): as the
David Schaich (he): products of the occupation, probability.
David Schaich (he): and the total number of replicas in the remaining
David Schaich (he): term in the so it's this expression
David Schaich (he): some now over R. Times, P. I mean I can come down with some there and then the logarithm of P. I. Times are.
David Schaich (he): Let me see you one with one rhythm of the product.
I can see some
David Schaich (he): of log rhythms.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): since these occupation probabilities, like all probabilities, sum up to one
David Schaich (he): the our Api log, our term the P. I. Drops out. That's equal to one.
David Schaich (he): We have a second factor of our with with
David Schaich (he): the negative sign compared to that first factor.
David Schaich (he): and we are left with just our factors of
David Schaich (he): some over the single system. Entropy
David Schaich (he): P. I. Of the Roots microstates I. From one to N.
David Schaich (he): Now the question is. how do we get this expression for the entropy
David Schaich (he): express in terms of the energy, so that we can take its derivative.
David Schaich (he): and find this temperature. The
David Schaich (he): energy dependence is implicit in here. Next to
David Schaich (he): that, that. the total energy that we want to take the derivative, with respect to is just a so of occupation. Number Times Microstate Energy or
David Schaich (he): Rpi Times, e. I. Somebody is hiding there.
David Schaich (he): The question is how to get it out.
David Schaich (he): We, and trick to do that which it's not necessarily obvious to look at. It is to apply what we know about
David Schaich (he): equilibrium for the overall
David Schaich (he): system of
David Schaich (he): it's reservoir.
David Schaich (he): that is, micro canonical, but just in general.
David Schaich (he): we know that
David Schaich (he): some dynamic equilibrium corresponds to
David Schaich (he): the maximum entropy given the constraints
David Schaich (he): that's probability here
David Schaich (he): and in the case of the whole system, energy
David Schaich (he): are conserved that back under the screen there. so the overall system with our replicas
David Schaich (he): has to be subject to
David Schaich (he): conservation of energy. I see micro canonical setup.
David Schaich (he): The occupation probabilities
David Schaich (he): we have seen also have to be conserved to add up to 100%
David Schaich (he): and maximizing the entropy subject to
David Schaich (he): these 2 constraints, you just
David Schaich (he): a very similar procedure to what we did
David Schaich (he): last week when derived David.
David Schaich (he): The expression for thermodynamic equilibrium to the market economic ensemble. Just from this second law of thermodynamics that identifies the equilibrium
David Schaich (he): system as one with maximum entropy.
David Schaich (he): We introduce the drums multipliers and consider the modified energy that starts off with the so a lot of an entropy that starts off with the total entropy
David Schaich (he): of these all replicas
David Schaich (he): our.
David Schaich (he): And then, as that 2 Lagrange multipliers, one
David Schaich (he): that enforcing the
David Schaich (he): conservation for probability. I believe it's all I have to set up to one.
David Schaich (he): and the second
David Schaich (he): just refute later simplicity
David Schaich (he): requires that the
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): i'll see you
David Schaich (he): energies weighted by the occupation probabilities.
David Schaich (he): times, ours, the occupation number of times. The energy has the to the total energy that is conserved in the micro canonical system.
David Schaich (he): I think there is
David Schaich (he): space
David Schaich (he): here just to quickly take the
David Schaich (he): derivative of this modified entropy
David Schaich (he): with respect to an arbitrary one of those occupation Probabilities want to
David Schaich (he): maximize this set the derivative equal to 0.
David Schaich (he): It's also easy to check that. The second derivative. Is negative which we oh, skipped last week. But
David Schaich (he): you can do on your own
David Schaich (he): the derivative of P. I.
David Schaich (he): Same expression we worked with last week, the overall factor
David Schaich (he): minus R.
David Schaich (he): We get a chronic or delta. I. K.
David Schaich (he): The derivative of P. I. The
right
David Schaich (he): changes the
David Schaich (he): index, i. To K. And the only remaining term that survives from that big sum.
David Schaich (he): Similarly, a ek
David Schaich (he): divided by the derivative
David Schaich (he): it is.
David Schaich (he): you can pull out
David Schaich (he): a chronic or delta, I. K. This sum of the first Lagrange, multiplier.
comic, or delta, gives us one
David Schaich (he): when I equals K. And 0 the rest of the time
David Schaich (he): it's. Similarly. there you go.
David Schaich (he): Delta, I. K. Gives us minus beta, all right. E. K. From the second.
David Schaich (he): the branch multiplier.
David Schaich (he): So all of that those 3 terms something to 0 we can rearrange to
David Schaich (he): isolate that log
David Schaich (he): E. K. Factor
David Schaich (he): that will have on the other side
David Schaich (he): a minus one we divide through.
David Schaich (he): The other. Term is by minus R.
David Schaich (he): And i'll shift them to the other side of the equal sign. You get a plus alpha over R. The cars canceled out there meeting us with a minus data.
David Schaich (he): Okay.
David Schaich (he): actually go ahead.
David Schaich (he): In addition to
David Schaich (he): next, she trying to keep both on the screen at once.
David Schaich (he): We exponentiate both sides. We have an expression for the occupation probability
David Schaich (he): in terms of these 2 Lagrange multipliers, alpha and Beta.
David Schaich (he): It's the exponential.
David Schaich (he): These 3 terms.
actually minus
David Schaich (he): one minus L. Over R. Mine is the in K.
David Schaich (he): So I've written in that way, so that I can rearrange it to exponential of divided by the exponential of the positive factor, one minus
David Schaich (he): also over all that that
David Schaich (he): e to the negative x. It's one over e to the plus x.
David Schaich (he): and about change variables
David Schaich (he): and define a an alternative parameter Z.
David Schaich (he): That is the exponential of one minus alpha over r
David Schaich (he): the E. To the minus beta. E. K. Comes along with Roy.
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): you have an expression for
David Schaich (he): the occupation, probabilities in thermodynamic equilibrium
David Schaich (he): in terms of 2
David Schaich (he): and cross, multiplier parameters, Beta and Z,
David Schaich (he): that we can
David Schaich (he): in a grip on by composing
David Schaich (he): you constraints that we started off with.
David Schaich (he): That's how we get back from the modified and for the to the true entropy as total that we want to maximize.
David Schaich (he): so demand that you occupation probabilities all some up to one.
David Schaich (he): How is this? Just that
David Schaich (he): one over said so? All of these exponential factors? E. To the minus Beta. the I equals one.
David Schaich (he): and if we multiply that through. and we find is that as a function of beta, it is just some overall
David Schaich (he): of the microstates of the canonical system, the exponential minus state of the times, the I.
David Schaich (he): This is known as
David Schaich (he): the partition function.
David Schaich (he): and turns out to be
David Schaich (he): the fundamental
David Schaich (he): quantity that really characterizes a canonical system, and from which all of the derived quantities of interest, like the
David Schaich (he): internal energy and heat, capacity, or entropy, can be dropped. This is
yeah
David Schaich (he): quantity that it will be seeing repeatedly as we first wrap up the derivation of the canonical ensemble. Again. apply the economical ensemble to you various
David Schaich (he): examples and situations.
David Schaich (he): The other constraint is that
David Schaich (he): in total energy has to be given by
David Schaich (he): that sum over occupation numbers for our times. P. I. Weighted by the energy e. I. Of each microstate.
David Schaich (he): and what we can do here if we were to.
David Schaich (he): So I get what we have for P. I. Is now a
David Schaich (he): ratio of an exponential factor, divided by a sum of exponential actors where you get basically a mess.
David Schaich (he): But if we insert this into
David Schaich (he): the year
David Schaich (he): expression for the entropy that we had. and minus R
David Schaich (he): times, the some of the microstates of P. I. From the occupation probabilities
David Schaich (he): you can insert
David Schaich (he): our results for the occupation probabilities inside that logarithm. So pi it's one over the partition function times the exponential.
David Schaich (he): even the minus data e. I
David Schaich (he): If we break up that log of the product into a sum of 2 logs. We have
David Schaich (he): the minus R Times log of one over Z.
David Schaich (he): We have
David Schaich (he): all all independent of I. They some
David Schaich (he): P. Of I. Over a microstate i. Which add up to one as always.
David Schaich (he): Then we have. The second factor is a minus r times, the logarithm of the to the minus beta times the energy
David Schaich (he): It's just it's argument.
David Schaich (he): So we have a minus R. Times minus beta
David Schaich (he): plus our data. they some over
David Schaich (he): probabilities weighted by the energy, is going down
David Schaich (he): from that exponential factor, or, in other words.
David Schaich (he): imposing the constraints that are as a some p. I. E. As up to the total energy
David Schaich (he): we have, that the total energy, this whole entropy is
David Schaich (he): maybe the Times. This tool energy, plus an additional term
David Schaich (he): of the.
David Schaich (he): and this is
David Schaich (he): where we wanted to get. In order to
David Schaich (he): take the derivative and determine the inverse temperature. I will drop the total subscripts just for use of writing for the time being. So one over temperature
David Schaich (he): is Dsde, fixing the number of particles
The easiest derivative to take is
David Schaich (he): with respect to itself that we use that multiplicative factor of Beta, our Lagrange multiplier.
David Schaich (he): But we also need to account for the possibility that Beta itself depends on energy.
David Schaich (he): just like everything else. Indeed. micro canonical system that
David Schaich (he): we are currently analyzing from Omega plus its reservoir.
David Schaich (he): R is just a number.
David Schaich (he): The number of replicas about Z.
David Schaich (he): You have seen is yeah. involves the energy. and is also cast as a function of Beta. So it will be useful to
David Schaich (he): take the derivative of log. Z. That gives us
David Schaich (he): all right over, said times by the changing one, the derivative of Z itself. With respect to E. You've written that as a function of data. So we will take
David Schaich (he): derivative in the Chamber with respect to data. another factor of
David Schaich (he): derivative of
David Schaich (he): with respect to the energy at same factor that showed up the other term.
David Schaich (he): So what can we do with this?
David Schaich (he): The best thing to do is apply
David Schaich (he): the definition of the partition function that we have
David Schaich (he): come up with.
David Schaich (he): We consider one over. Z.
David Schaich (he): You said you pay now and
David Schaich (he): plug in that some of over all microstates.
David Schaich (he): I We pick up a factor of negative E. I.
David Schaich (he): Inside that. So
David Schaich (he): the exponential factor
David Schaich (he): is unaffected by the derivative and we can recognize.
David Schaich (he): and that one over Z is exponential of minus a times the energy.
David Schaich (he): the you occupation, probability that we computed from maximizing the entropy. So this is a factor of negative. Some P. I.
David Schaich (he): Times, e. I. Which
David Schaich (he): constraint is still on the screen is negative. Total energy divided by the number of replicas. All right. so plugging that into
David Schaich (he): our calculation for the inverse temperature is the derivative.
Entropy
David Schaich (he): we have it.
David Schaich (he): Let's see
David Schaich (he): us, our times, whatever it is that the beta is minus here over our.
David Schaich (he): and then there's a
David Schaich (he): the energy there.
David Schaich (he): our signs one of our it cancels off, and we have Yeah.
David Schaich (he): and remarkably simple results. That's the temperature
David Schaich (he): is just one over this with large multiplier data.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): what we have at this point
David Schaich (he): is, in fact, our final expression
David Schaich (he): for
David Schaich (he): economical system.
David Schaich (he): What is new
David Schaich (he): either as the gives distribution or
David Schaich (he): the Boltzmann distribution. as always in
thermodynamic
David Schaich (he): equilibrium.
David Schaich (he): we have a
David Schaich (he): probability piece of I
David Schaich (he): that is, one over z
David Schaich (he): e to the minus energy over T
David Schaich (he): for the corresponding micro state back on the screen there
David Schaich (he): and then. The partition function is the sum over all microstates
David Schaich (he): of the minus energy over T
David Schaich (he): and one over T itself. We can also call Beta the
David Schaich (he): inverse temperature.
David Schaich (he): So this is also known as the Boltzmann distribution, and this exponential factor.
David Schaich (he): so it's it's specifically.
David Schaich (he): No.
David Schaich (he): as the Boltzmann factor.
David Schaich (he): And what we can do now is note that
David Schaich (he): in this gives distribution there is no longer any explicit
David Schaich (he): reference to our ons offs before the reservoir that was fixing the temperature
David Schaich (he): one over beta work
David Schaich (he): our economical system.
David Schaich (he): so we can interpret this P. I
David Schaich (he): no longer has in occupation, probability.
David Schaich (he): but as a microstate probability.
David Schaich (he): the probability for it.
David Schaich (he): our system of interest, Omega.
David Schaich (he): to adopt the corresponding microstates.
David Schaich (he): Little Omega
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): microstate has energy, e sub i. That is
David Schaich (he): no water conserved.
David Schaich (he): So we have reached the goal that we set out before the break.
David Schaich (he): We have an expression for our system, Omega in terms of a fixed temperature.
David Schaich (he): and the non-conserved energies of the corresponding microstates. and all of the details of the reservoir that we bye use the rep like a trick to come up with an exhaust force that ons up is now irrelevant
David Schaich (he): and even.
David Schaich (he): and in the canonical approach.
David Schaich (he): Apart from
David Schaich (he): fixing this temperature T. And for dynamic equilibrium all the details of that not only it irrelevant, but also just unknowable in principle.
David Schaich (he): You just know it has
David Schaich (he): fixed temperature
David Schaich (he): that economical system picks up, thanks to the temperature being and intensive quality. So that is the derivation of the economic ensemble in from dynamic.
David Schaich (he): from maximizing the entropy
David Schaich (he): which gives us an expression for
David Schaich (he): microstate probabilities and the partition function
David Schaich (he): that
David Schaich (he): is the starting point for deriving any other quantity of interest.
David Schaich (he): Any questions about
David Schaich (he): the fairly long, like the information that we went through to to get to this point.
David Schaich (he): So if you're all happy with that. that, so it starts arriving
David Schaich (he): interesting quantities.
David Schaich (he): the canonical ensemble.
David Schaich (he): So back in the micro canonical ensemble, as we saw actually at the
David Schaich (he): very beginning
David Schaich (he): for lecture today, the temperature is one of you survive products that depends on
David Schaich (he): it can serve energy that characterizes the micro canonical ensemble.
David Schaich (he): The canonical approach turns that on his head.
David Schaich (he): We now have the temperature fixed. and the energy of the system is fluctuating in thermodynamic equilibrium, as the system keeps probabilistically adopting
David Schaich (he): one microstate after the next. But there is a well defined
David Schaich (he): quantity of that energy. They may be here
David Schaich (he): expectation value, the expected value.
David Schaich (he): I'll be in trouble, energy.
David Schaich (he): something that we can derive now based on the fixed temperature so right that, as always in the angular brackets for expectation, value of the energy.
David Schaich (he): Note that it is a function of temperature, also a function of particle number that we can leave implicit.
David Schaich (he): just because we're used to the particle number being conserved in both the micro canonical economical cases.
David Schaich (he): And then it.
David Schaich (he): Definition of the expectation value is, as always, the
David Schaich (he): some over all of the outcomes in our outcome space.
David Schaich (he): That's because the some
all of our microstates, let's say there are some of them
David Schaich (he): of the quality is expectation value we are considering. So the energy E of I. In Microsoft, omega i.
David Schaich (he): We did by the probability of the system adopting
David Schaich (he): this Microsoft Omega, I. With the energy.
David Schaich (he): So we know the
David Schaich (he): probabilities in the not for what sample or given by the use distribution.
David Schaich (he): You can plug that in. I'm gonna be
David Schaich (he): I Independence partition function factor out front
David Schaich (he): and be left with the energy waited by each of the minus beta times the energy
David Schaich (he): which actually, if we look back to
David Schaich (he): calculations that we were doing to figure out the temperature.
David Schaich (he): Okay.
David Schaich (he): see this one over, said some energy times exponential pulsing factor appearing
David Schaich (he): being related to the negative all of one over Z, the derivative of a set with respect to data not too surprisingly carrying out that derivative with respect to David, just brings down
David Schaich (he): that energy so plenty of that negative sign. it comes along with it. since one of
David Schaich (he): he's in. he made up.
David Schaich (he): which
David Schaich (he): we consider the chain rule is just the inverse temperature. Derivative i'll be you logarithm of the partition function.
David Schaich (he): So this is an illustration of
David Schaich (he): the importance of that partition function I was hinting at earlier.
David Schaich (he): is taking the
David Schaich (he): temperature, or probably inverse temperature. Derivative The logarithm of the partition function gives us the expectation value for the internal energy of
David Schaich (he): economical system.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): is worthwhile to ask. Given that the energy is now
David Schaich (he): a function of the temperature.
David Schaich (he): How exactly does
David Schaich (he): the energy
David Schaich (he): expectation value? Yeah.
David Schaich (he): Depend on the temperature team?
David Schaich (he): This is.
David Schaich (he): in the sense the
David Schaich (he): same question and principle that we looked at we're talking about heat exchange, we thought.
David Schaich (he): How does the temperature depend on the energy?
David Schaich (he): Does it rise or fall as the amount of energy
David Schaich (he): increases or decreases.
David Schaich (he): and to answer the question of how the energy now depends on the temperature that characterizes economical ensemble. You can define
David Schaich (he): the quantity.
David Schaich (he): No, that's the
David Schaich (he): each capacity. C sub b, which is the derivative of the energy, expectation, value. With respect to the temperature
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): in the homework assignment to next week
David Schaich (he): you will show the Pd. Capacity is not negative. It is to say that higher temperatures
David Schaich (he): never decrease the
David Schaich (he): internal energy, and generically you will see that the quality holds only in very special
David Schaich (he): and specific cases. So generically. the higher temperature needs to a larger internal energy which is
David Schaich (he): in nice alignment with what we would expect based on our everyday experience with concepts of energy and temperature.
David Schaich (he): I'll see that
David Schaich (he): the way to
David Schaich (he): drive this and she may have already seen if you look at homework is by
David Schaich (he): providing this heat capacity to
David Schaich (he): the fluctuations of microstate energies around
David Schaich (he): this expectation value, so e on one, is the expectation value squared. This is a
David Schaich (he): an example of a
David Schaich (he): general and and quite powerful aspect of statistical physics. Notice fluctuation, response relations where
David Schaich (he): the fluctuations around the expectation value
David Schaich (he): are related to the response of that expectation value to the change in
David Schaich (he): some parameter that defines the system. In this case the
David Schaich (he): temperature that defines the canonical on song.
David Schaich (he): One other thing to mention just in passing is that the subscript be on the heat capacity is there because we're assuming that the
David Schaich (he): volume of the system is
David Schaich (he): staying fixed in this definition that put into the definition here as an explicit constraint, because you're not yet included the volume
David Schaich (he): as an explicit parameter
David Schaich (he): in a thermodynamic system that something
David Schaich (he): get to, Probably in a couple weeks time, certainly before the break will look at thermodynamic cycles.
David Schaich (he): and you more of. or the interrelations between pressure, volume. temperature, and energy.
David Schaich (he): There is an alternative key capacity that counts the pressure of C sub p.
David Schaich (he): Which I will show up in that context. and a different only slightly from
David Schaich (he): C sub b. So in both cases the derivative
David Schaich (he): of the average internal energy with your stuff in the temperature.
David Schaich (he): keeping either the joining or the pressure fixed.
David Schaich (he): So that should give you a
David Schaich (he): everything you need for the homework requirements, and we can move on to
David Schaich (he): other interesting derived quantities. you know, like a ensemble. one of which, of course, is. do you entropy?
David Schaich (he): We consider this in
David Schaich (he): the derivation of the with reference to
David Schaich (he): the various replicas, you know, on a large thermal reservoir.
David Schaich (he): We now want to derive the entropy based on
David Schaich (he): micro State probabilities, with no reference to
David Schaich (he): the unknowable.
David Schaich (he): The whole reservoir. So we go back to
David Schaich (he): the general definition. The entropy is
David Schaich (he): the negative sum over P. I. I. For the microstate capabilities. Yeah. And we can plug in our gives distribution for
David Schaich (he): one of those factors of Pi.
David Schaich (he): So as before I one over the partition function.
David Schaich (he): the exponential
David Schaich (he): Boltzmann factor E. To the minus beta Times energy.
David Schaich (he): and again
David Schaich (he): breaking up the log of the product into the sum of walks. We have. you know. negative.
David Schaich (he): What is that? I'm just over all probabilities, adding up to one. So here is it what I said.
David Schaich (he): The other term is the log of the exponential. So just the argument comes down
David Schaich (he): 2 negative factors.
David Schaich (he): They I independence
David Schaich (he): Beta, multiplying the sum of the microstates of the microstate.
David Schaich (he): Well, that is just the definition of the internal energy expectation value.
David Schaich (he): So we have a more than a partition function plus expectation value
David Schaich (he): times, data, the inverse temperature, or currently divided
David Schaich (he): by the temperature.
David Schaich (he): We can also rearrange this to express the
David Schaich (he): internal energy, expectation, value is
David Schaich (he): the Temperature Times. The entropy. By this in times of the of the partition function.
David Schaich (he): And this way of writing things.
David Schaich (he): We're calling that the
David Schaich (he): energy and
David Schaich (he): entropy are themselves functions of the temperature actually motivates introducing a new concept.
David Schaich (he): So we have temperature, times, entropy. What what is known as a free energy, a little call app. It's just this quantity. The negative Temperature Times, the logarithm of the partition function.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): this is specifically known as be helpful.
David Schaich (he): Pre. Or G.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. A function of temperature is negative temperature, times.
David Schaich (he): or the partition function, which itself is a function of the temperature.
David Schaich (he): If we rearrange this to solve for the partition function, Z.
David Schaich (he): Divide 3 by negative.
David Schaich (he): That gives us just
David Schaich (he): the exponential of minus app
David Schaich (he): over to you. So they
David Schaich (he): contact expression for the partition function that has the implicit within it.
David Schaich (he): That's just rearranging the definition.
David Schaich (he): the helpful free energy.
David Schaich (he): And we can also
David Schaich (he): put this into microstate probability that gives distribution
David Schaich (he): whatever that is. one, over the exponential of a negative number which is the exponential of a positive number. We just have the the free energy
David Schaich (he): minus the microstate energy.
David Schaich (he): all weighted by the fixed temperature
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): free energy is to some extent so
David Schaich (he): okay terminology. But this is the gives an idea for the considerations that let's with the call that that's all.
David Schaich (he): It combines with the energy of each individual microstates
David Schaich (he): to determine the probability of that corresponding microstate. In particular, it has the same dimensions as energy and temperature in our units with
David Schaich (he): energy and temperature, having
David Schaich (he): the same dimensions and same units.
David Schaich (he): so the free energy is essentially what is left from the entropy has been
David Schaich (he): maximized, which. so we can see from the signs in this relation, minimizes the
David Schaich (he): free energy
David Schaich (he): continuing on in this veins are actually
David Schaich (he): there's a little bit more use. We can get out of the I don't know it's free energy just by considering it so. Derivatives
David Schaich (he): to the derivatives of the help of free energy will turn out to be. We'll lean into the other. talking about
David Schaich (he): the average internal energy
David Schaich (he): and the functions, except for sure.
David Schaich (he): So, hopping back to the expression we came up with just a few minutes ago with the internal energy. is
David Schaich (he): the negative beta, derivative.
David Schaich (he): The more of the partition function.
David Schaich (he): You write that here for it. Videos
David Schaich (he): you can recognize that
David Schaich (he): negative
David Schaich (he): is the ratio of
David Schaich (he): almost free energy to the temperature.
David Schaich (he): This is derivative with respect to the inverse temperature of elements, free energy divided by the temperature. we can't convert into a
David Schaich (he): temperature derivative
David Schaich (he): just an over a factor of the derivative of the temperature itself with respect to his inverse. So with T being one over data, we can take the
David Schaich (he): derivative of one over data our heads it's minus one
David Schaich (he): over Beta squared.
David Schaich (he): and of course, one over. Beta is just the temperature itself.
David Schaich (he): So there is
David Schaich (he): another illustration of how the partition function now in the form of the
David Schaich (he): is the starting point to analyze and derive these quantities, like the average eternal energy.
David Schaich (he): And similarly, for
David Schaich (he): the entropy we consider just the
David Schaich (he): temperature dependence of the free energy
David Schaich (he): by itself.
David Schaich (he): I'll pick up 2 terms.
David Schaich (he): problem.
David Schaich (he): first, the derivative of T. With respect to C, it's just one.
David Schaich (he): and then we have myst times. It's your derivative of the in itself.
David Schaich (he): and we just not finished for leading
David Schaich (he): a derivative of what set with respect to an inverse temperature, to the internal energy.
David Schaich (he): If we keep track of
David Schaich (he): negative signs and factors of T,
it's.
David Schaich (he): you can see in our heads with some care, or work it out explicitly from this line here is changing variables from Beta to T.
David Schaich (he): That
David Schaich (he): this derivative
David Schaich (he): is negative internal energy over the temperature. and
David Schaich (he): our first derivation of the entropy we found plus internal energy over temperature.
David Schaich (he): So this is
David Schaich (he): negative entropy. You would put it another way.
David Schaich (he): The
David Schaich (he): is given by even simpler derivative of the free energy which we can also relates to the difference between
David Schaich (he): the free energy, the average internal energy
David Schaich (he): weighted by the temperature just
David Schaich (he): inverting back from the water of the partition function to
David Schaich (he): the free energy divided by temperature. And that is actually a good place to stop for today
David Schaich (he): a couple minutes to one speaker, one out of time.
David Schaich (he): So this recap, because we went through a lot of the I wanted to make sure we got to the heat capacity, so that you had plenty of exposure to that. With
David Schaich (he): more than 8 we about to work on that homework assignment. We started off in the micro canonical ups of all, with a definition of the temperature of that looks fairly abstract as the response
David Schaich (he): of the entropy to a change in the energy with the fixed number of particles we saw that it's produced sensible behavior and the context of heat exchange
David Schaich (he): that agreed with our everyday intuition that energy should flow
David Schaich (he): for power to colder systems, bringing their temperatures closer together. and then based on the practicalities of actually carrying out physics, experiments.
David Schaich (he): observing the statistical systems that we're talking about.
David Schaich (he): I don't want to happen completely isolated from us. For the rest of the universe.
David Schaich (he): You want to be able to observe them and exchange energy with them.
David Schaich (he): so that led us to the canonical ensemble.
David Schaich (he): Hey?
David Schaich (he): Means of allowing the energy of a system to fluctuate
David Schaich (he): by exchange with its environment while fixing its temperature through thermal contact with a large external reservoir. It roughly, the trick showed us that the details of that
David Schaich (he): thermal reservoir, or
David Schaich (he): irrelevant to the chemical ensemble, and, in fact, unknowable
David Schaich (he): in the canonical approach. What we have is the Gibbs distribution and it's pulsing factor from which you have the partition function. It can derive
David Schaich (he): all of these interesting qualities, energy, entropy, and free energy, that we will
David Schaich (he): begin playing with next week in top 3 applications.
David Schaich (he): So a busy day today. I'm: sure you're also busy with the computer project due tomorrow.
David Schaich (he): I'll let you get on with all of that
David Schaich (he): just checking the last time to see if there are
David Schaich (he): any questions about those assignments. or what we covered in the past couple of hours.
David Schaich (he): So good luck with that project that assignments and.